RL_AGENT_README.md, before:

# Reinforcement Learning Agent for Circle Placement

This implementation provides an end-to-end reinforcement learning solution for the circle placement optimization problem, with both a baseline and a state-of-the-art parallel implementation.

## Overview

The RL agent uses Deep Q-Learning (DQN) to learn optimal circle placement strategies. The agent:
- Takes as input the current map state, radius to place, and number of circles already placed
- Outputs Q-values for each possible position on the map
- Learns through playing multiple games on randomly generated maps
- Uses experience replay and target networks for stable learning

## Components

### 1. `src/algorithms/rl_agent.py`
Contains the baseline RL implementation:
- **CirclePlacementNet**: Basic neural network architecture for the DQN
- **CirclePlacementEnv**: Environment that simulates the circle placement task
- **DQNAgent**: The baseline RL agent with training logic

### 2. `src/algorithms/rl_agent_parallel.py` (State-of-the-Art)
Enhanced parallel implementation with advanced features:
- **ImprovedCirclePlacementNet**: Advanced CNN architecture with attention mechanisms
- **PrioritizedReplayBuffer**: Prioritized experience replay for efficient learning
- **ImprovedDQNAgent**: State-of-the-art agent with:
  - Double DQN for reduced overestimation
  - N-step returns for better credit assignment
  - Soft target updates for stability
  - Gradient clipping and normalization
  - Learning rate scheduling
  - Detailed performance metrics

### 3. `src/scripts/train_rl_agent.py`
Baseline training script that:
- Trains the agent on multiple randomly generated maps
- Saves checkpoints during training
- Evaluates the trained agent
- Generates visualizations of training progress and best solutions

### 4. `src/scripts/train_rl_agent_parallel.py` (Recommended)
Advanced parallel training script with:
- Parallel environment simulation for faster training
- Detailed logging with performance metrics, training metrics, and improvement tracking
- Enhanced visualizations including epsilon decay, Q-value evolution, and coverage distributions
- Comprehensive evaluation with statistical analysis
- Automatic hyperparameter optimization

### 5. `src/scripts/compare_methods.py`
Comparison script that:
- Loads a trained RL agent
- Compares it with BHO and PSO on the same maps
- Generates comparison plots and statistics

### 6. `src/scripts/demo_rl_agent.py`
Interactive demo that:
- Shows step-by-step circle placement by the trained agent
- Visualizes the decision-making process
- Displays final results and statistics

## Usage

### 1. Training the RL Agent (Baseline)

```bash
cd src/scripts
python train_rl_agent.py
```

### 2. Training the Improved RL Agent (Recommended)

```bash
cd src/scripts
python train_rl_agent_parallel.py
```

The improved version will:
- Train for 5000 episodes with parallel environments
- Use advanced DQN techniques for better performance
- Provide detailed logging every 100 episodes showing:
  - Performance metrics (coverage, reward, steps)
  - Training metrics (epsilon, loss, Q-values, gradients)
  - Improvement tracking over time
- Generate enhanced visualizations
- Save the final model to `results/rl_agent_improved/final_improved_model.pt`

Key improvements in the parallel version:
- **Faster training**: Parallel environment simulation
- **Better architecture**: CNN with attention mechanisms
- **Advanced techniques**: Double DQN, prioritized replay, n-step returns
- **Improved epsilon decay**: Decays over 25% of episodes (addresses your concern about epsilon ~0.10 at episode 600)
- **Better logging**: Comprehensive metrics and statistics

### 3. Running the Demo

After training, run the interactive demo:

```bash
python demo_rl_agent.py
```

This shows:
- Step-by-step visualization of circle placement
- Final placement results
- Coverage statistics

### 4. Comparing with Other Methods

To compare the RL agent with BHO and PSO:

```bash
python compare_methods.py
```

This will:
- Run all three methods on 10 randomly generated maps
- Generate comparison plots and statistics
- Save results to `results/comparison/`

## How It Works

### State Representation
The agent receives a state vector containing:
- Flattened current map (normalized to [0, 1])
- Current radius to place (normalized)
- Number of circles already placed (normalized)

### Action Space
Actions are (x, y) coordinates where to place the circle center.

### Reward Function
The reward is the weighted sum of map values covered by the placed circle.

### Training Process
1. Generate a random map using the `random_seeder()` function
2. Agent places circles sequentially, largest to smallest
3. After each placement, the covered area is marked as consumed
4. Episode ends when all circles are placed
5. Agent learns to maximize total weight collected

### Key Features
- **Valid action masking**: Prevents placing circles outside map boundaries
- **Experience replay**: Stores and samples past experiences for stable learning
- **Target network**: Updated periodically for stable Q-learning
- **Epsilon-greedy exploration**: Balances exploration and exploitation

## Results

The trained agent learns to:
- Identify high-weight regions on the map
- Place larger circles in areas with concentrated weights
- Efficiently cover the map to maximize total weight collected

Typical performance after training:
- **Baseline agent**: Coverage ratio 0.6-0.7
- **Improved agent**: Coverage ratio 0.7-0.85 (10-20% improvement)
- Inference time: <0.1 seconds per map
- Consistent performance across different map types

### Epsilon Decay Schedule

Regarding your question about epsilon being ~0.10 at episode 600/2000:
- In the baseline version, this is expected with epsilon_decay=0.995
- The improved version uses exponential decay over 25% of episodes:
  - Epsilon reaches 0.10 around episode 1250 (out of 5000)
  - This provides better exploration in early training
  - More exploitation in later training for fine-tuning

## Customization

### Modifying the Improved Neural Network
Edit `ImprovedCirclePlacementNet` in `rl_agent_parallel.py`:
```python
class ImprovedCirclePlacementNet(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, map_size, hidden_size=1024, num_heads=8):
        # Modify architecture, add layers, change attention heads
```

### Changing Training Parameters
In `train_rl_agent_parallel.py`:
```python
agent = ImprovedDQNAgent(
    map_size=map_size,
    radii=radii,
    learning_rate=3e-4,           # Adjust learning rate
    gamma=0.99,                   # Discount factor
    epsilon_start=1.0,            # Initial exploration rate
    epsilon_end=0.01,             # Final exploration rate
    epsilon_decay_steps=n_episodes // 4,  # Decay over 25% of episodes
    buffer_size=100000,           # Larger buffer for prioritized replay
    batch_size=64,                # Larger batch size
    tau=0.005,                    # Soft update parameter
    n_step=3,                     # N-step returns
    use_double_dqn=True          # Enable/disable double DQN
)
```

### Using Different Map Generation
Modify the `random_seeder()` function parameters:
```python
weighted_matrix = random_seeder(map_size, time_steps=100000)  # Adjust time_steps
```

## Requirements

All requirements are already included in `requirements.txt`:
- numpy
- matplotlib
- numba
- torch
- tqdm

Commit message:

Optimize RL agent for GPU memory with architecture and memory improvements
Co-authored-by: mengsig <mengsig@icloud.com>

RL_AGENT_README.md, after:

# Reinforcement Learning Agent for Circle Placement

This implementation provides an end-to-end reinforcement learning solution for the circle placement optimization problem, with both a baseline and a state-of-the-art parallel implementation.

## Overview

The RL agent uses Deep Q-Learning (DQN) to learn optimal circle placement strategies. The agent:
- Takes as input the current map state, radius to place, and number of circles already placed
- Outputs Q-values for each possible position on the map
- Learns through playing multiple games on randomly generated maps
- Uses experience replay and target networks for stable learning

## Components

### 1. `src/algorithms/rl_agent.py`
Contains the baseline RL implementation:
- **CirclePlacementNet**: Basic neural network architecture for the DQN
- **CirclePlacementEnv**: Environment that simulates the circle placement task
- **DQNAgent**: The baseline RL agent with training logic

### 2. `src/algorithms/rl_agent_parallel.py` (State-of-the-Art)
Enhanced parallel implementation with advanced features:
- **ImprovedCirclePlacementNet**: Efficient CNN architecture optimized for GPU memory
  - Convolutional layers with stride for dimension reduction
  - Removed attention mechanism to prevent OOM errors on consumer GPUs
  - Batch normalization and dropout for regularization
- **PrioritizedReplayBuffer**: Prioritized experience replay for efficient learning
- **ImprovedDQNAgent**: State-of-the-art agent with:
  - Double DQN for reduced overestimation
  - N-step returns for better credit assignment
  - Soft target updates for stability
  - Gradient clipping and normalization
  - Learning rate scheduling
  - GPU support with automatic device selection
  - Optimized tensor operations to prevent memory warnings

### 3. `src/scripts/train_rl_agent.py`
Baseline training script that:
- Trains the agent on multiple randomly generated maps
- Saves checkpoints during training
- Evaluates the trained agent
- Generates visualizations of training progress and best solutions

### 4. `src/scripts/train_rl_agent_parallel.py` (Recommended)
Advanced parallel training script with:
- Parallel environment simulation for faster training
- Detailed logging with performance metrics, training metrics, and improvement tracking
- Enhanced visualizations including epsilon decay, Q-value evolution, and coverage distributions
- Comprehensive evaluation with statistical analysis
- Automatic hyperparameter optimization

### 5. `src/scripts/compare_methods.py`
Comparison script that:
- Loads a trained RL agent
- Compares it with BHO and PSO on the same maps
- Generates comparison plots and statistics

### 6. `src/scripts/demo_rl_agent.py`
Interactive demo that:
- Shows step-by-step circle placement by the trained agent
- Visualizes the decision-making process
- Displays final results and statistics

## Usage

### 1. Training the RL Agent (Baseline)

```bash
cd src/scripts
python train_rl_agent.py
```

### 2. Training the Improved RL Agent (Recommended)

```bash
cd src/scripts
python train_rl_agent_parallel.py
```

The improved version will:
- Train for 5000 episodes with parallel environments
- Use advanced DQN techniques for better performance
- Provide detailed logging every 100 episodes showing:
  - Performance metrics (coverage, reward, steps)
  - Training metrics (epsilon, loss, Q-values, gradients)
  - Improvement tracking over time
- Generate enhanced visualizations
- Save the final model to `results/rl_agent_improved/final_improved_model.pt`

Key improvements in the parallel version:
- **Faster training**: Parallel environment simulation (limited to 4 environments for GPU memory)
- **Better architecture**: Efficient CNN with spatial pooling (optimized for RTX 4070 8GB)
- **Advanced techniques**: Double DQN, prioritized replay, n-step returns
- **Improved epsilon decay**: Decays over 25% of episodes (addresses your concern about epsilon ~0.10 at episode 600)
- **Better logging**: Comprehensive metrics and statistics
- **Memory optimizations**: 
  - Reduced batch size to 32
  - Efficient numpy array conversion to prevent warnings
  - Stride convolutions to reduce feature map sizes

### 3. Running the Demo

After training, run the interactive demo:

```bash
python demo_rl_agent.py
```

This shows:
- Step-by-step visualization of circle placement
- Final placement results
- Coverage statistics

### 4. Comparing with Other Methods

To compare the RL agent with BHO and PSO:

```bash
python compare_methods.py
```

This will:
- Run all three methods on 10 randomly generated maps
- Generate comparison plots and statistics
- Save results to `results/comparison/`

## How It Works

### State Representation
The agent receives a state vector containing:
- Flattened current map (normalized to [0, 1])
- Current radius to place (normalized)
- Number of circles already placed (normalized)

### Action Space
Actions are (x, y) coordinates where to place the circle center.

### Reward Function
The reward is the weighted sum of map values covered by the placed circle.

### Training Process
1. Generate a random map using the `random_seeder()` function
2. Agent places circles sequentially, largest to smallest
3. After each placement, the covered area is marked as consumed
4. Episode ends when all circles are placed
5. Agent learns to maximize total weight collected

### Key Features
- **Valid action masking**: Prevents placing circles outside map boundaries
- **Experience replay**: Stores and samples past experiences for stable learning
- **Target network**: Updated periodically for stable Q-learning
- **Epsilon-greedy exploration**: Balances exploration and exploitation

## Results

The trained agent learns to:
- Identify high-weight regions on the map
- Place larger circles in areas with concentrated weights
- Efficiently cover the map to maximize total weight collected

Typical performance after training:
- **Baseline agent**: Coverage ratio 0.6-0.7
- **Improved agent**: Coverage ratio 0.7-0.85 (10-20% improvement)
- Inference time: <0.1 seconds per map
- Consistent performance across different map types

### Epsilon Decay Schedule

Regarding your question about epsilon being ~0.10 at episode 600/2000:
- In the baseline version, this is expected with epsilon_decay=0.995
- The improved version uses exponential decay over 25% of episodes:
  - Epsilon reaches 0.10 around episode 1250 (out of 5000)
  - This provides better exploration in early training
  - More exploitation in later training for fine-tuning

## Customization

### Modifying the Improved Neural Network
Edit `ImprovedCirclePlacementNet` in `rl_agent_parallel.py`:
```python
class ImprovedCirclePlacementNet(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, map_size, hidden_size=1024, num_heads=8):
        # Modify architecture, add layers, change attention heads
```

### Changing Training Parameters
In `train_rl_agent_parallel.py`:
```python
agent = ImprovedDQNAgent(
    map_size=map_size,
    radii=radii,
    learning_rate=3e-4,           # Adjust learning rate
    gamma=0.99,                   # Discount factor
    epsilon_start=1.0,            # Initial exploration rate
    epsilon_end=0.01,             # Final exploration rate
    epsilon_decay_steps=n_episodes // 4,  # Decay over 25% of episodes
    buffer_size=100000,           # Larger buffer for prioritized replay
    batch_size=64,                # Larger batch size
    tau=0.005,                    # Soft update parameter
    n_step=3,                     # N-step returns
    use_double_dqn=True          # Enable/disable double DQN
)
```

### Using Different Map Generation
Modify the `random_seeder()` function parameters:
```python
weighted_matrix = random_seeder(map_size, time_steps=100000)  # Adjust time_steps
```

## Troubleshooting

### GPU Memory Issues
If you encounter CUDA out of memory errors:
1. Run the memory test script: `python src/scripts/test_gpu_memory.py`
2. Reduce batch_size in the training script (default is 32)
3. Reduce the number of parallel environments
4. Use CPU training by setting `device=torch.device('cpu')` in the agent initialization

### Tensor Creation Warning
The warning about creating tensors from numpy arrays has been fixed by converting lists to numpy arrays before creating tensors.

### torch.load Deprecation
All torch.load calls now include `map_location` parameter to avoid deprecation warnings.

## Requirements

All requirements are already included in `requirements.txt`:
- numpy
- matplotlib
- numba
- torch
- tqdm
